I just wanted to do a land
acknowledgement first. Um, we're going
to think more about the land that we're
on in my workshop tomorrow. Um, but uh I
didn't I didn't hear one or see one
here. So, uh, this is the I found this
one from the library. Um, we acknowledge
that we occupy the unseated ancestral
homeland of the Ramatush Aloney peoples
who are the original inhabitants of the
San Francisco Peninsula. We recognize
that the Ramatic Shalomi understand the
interconnectedness of all things and
have maintained harmony with nature for
millennia. We honor the Ramatic Alone
peoples for their enduring commitment to
mother earth. As the indigenous
protectors of this land and in
accordance with their traditions, the
Ramites Alone have never seated, lost,
nor forgotten their responsibilities as
the caretakers of this place. as well as
for all peoples who reside in their
traditional territory. We recognize that
we benefit from living and working on
their traditional homeland. As uninvited
guests, we affirm their sovereign rights
as first peoples and wish to pay our
respects to the ancestors, elders, and
relatives of the Ramites community. We
recognize to respectfully honor Remmit
peoples, we must embrace and collaborate
meaningfully to record indigenous
knowledge and how we care for San
Francisco and all its people.
All right. Um,
so I want to share a few different um,
parts of my work with you today. Um,
some excerpts from a book I'm working
on, some images of some artwork that I'm
working on. Um but in responding to the
um
theme, what I really want to say first
is that um we can't think of surpassing
the body or surpassing the human without
confronting and reckoning with the
dehumanization of so many people around
the world, in particular Palestinians.
And I am wrestling with the question of
how to think or make art during a
genocide. um which also we will be
thinking about more in my um workshop
tomorrow with Cynthia Ling Lee and Mtai.
Um so first and most importantly free
Palestine.
Um this this work of mine I think was
advertised by the festival. I just
wanted to mention some of my earlier
work uh you might have heard of. I did
this performance called Becoming Dragon
where I lived in Second Life for 365
hours with a VR headset and a motion
capture system.
um asking the question um if as a
transwoman I'm supposed to get real life
experience to become to get gender
confirmation surgery. Uh could I get a
second life experience and then get my
species change surgery? Um that was that
was 2008. um done a lot of different
work since then including my book from
2002 poetic operations which thinks
about trans of color art and digital
media and um the poetics of trans of
trans of color poetics as really a
poetics of survival um survival of
violence
um which brings me to um the excerpt I
wanted to read from my forthcoming book
after man um and I think that to
reconcile with a dehumanization we
should look at artists that are
experiencing this dehumanization like
Palestinian artists. So I want to read
an excerpt from Mosab Abu Toha's poem uh
Mab Abu Jaha it all ceasefire sento in
which he invited a number of poets to
contribute to to one poem together. Um
we all long to write the poem that will
stop this death. All I ask is time blank
time. Some rest from frenzy, breathing
room till my fate can teach my beaten
spirit how to grieve.
The wall dissolves. A man sits in the
rubble of his house, weeping for his
children.
And my dream for the children of
Palestine is that they are free to run
and laugh in the streets bathed in love.
The comfortable knowing that the plane
flying overhead holds passengers of the
sky
is a privilege we all deserve.
never again happens again and again.
Allowing genocide to happen is horrific.
The death toll climbs numbers so vast I
can't even picture them. We all want to
live. You wailing a grief that will
never end. Grief as long as the curving
river as deep as the salted sea. You
typing feverishly into the night.
Writing to the world the only thing to
say. We are human. We are human. We
are of the land. We are salt and sand
and wind and blood and bone. You are who
I love.
So that's from Ceasefire Sento by Musab
Abu Toha. Um collectively written, these
lines express the grief and rage felt by
so many across the world in November
2023.
I started writing this a long time ago
as the Israeli Defense Forces bombed
Gaza in continuation of 75 years of
occupation of Nakba while claiming that
the attacks were in response to Hamas's
attack on October 7th, 2023.
These words say so much and not enough.
What can be said in the face of
genocide?
You might have seen the news in the last
few days that the estimated death toll
is over 600,000. Now,
as millions of people around the world
are mobilizing to stop the genocide in
Gaza, and governments around the world
ignore them, I a single poet, artist,
and scholar, long to write anything that
could even stop a single death.
On Monday, October 19 October 9th, 2023,
Israeli Defense Minister Yuav Galant
announced a complete siege of Gaza,
saying, "We are fighting human animals."
In doing so, Galant made clear that the
justification for the genocide of the
Palestinian people is that the Israeli
government sees them as less than human.
What I'm called to do here is to look at
the root causes at the dehumanization of
an entire people, the Palestinians, and
of so many other people around the world
to understand how the idea of the human
has become a weapon that can facilitate
facilitate genocide and mass death.
And more recently,
these this this kind of statement that
Palestinians are human animals or often
the Israeli ministers make the statement
that Palestinians don't exist
echoes our own uh President Donald
Trump's statements in the executive
order 14168
uh declaring that trans people do not
exist with the Orwellian title of
defending women from gender ideology
extremism.
and restoring biological truth to the
federal government issued on day one of
his presidency January 20th 25 declares
that the US government only recognizes
two sexes male and female
and that those sexes are immutable.
The order seeks not only to dehumanize
trans people but to deontologize to
remove us from ontology. Uh I understand
it as a statement of genocidal intent
saying trans people don't exist here.
We're gonna we're going to make the
conditions such that trans people don't
exist in this country.
And so facing these things my heart
breaks again. My heart breaks for Gaza.
My heart breaks for Shik Shar. My heart
breaks for the West Bank. My heart
breaks for Palestine. My heart breaks
for Makia Bryant, for Dante Wright, for
Adam Toledo.
And that resonates on a personal level
with my heartbreak for my foster
daughter. Um, I I had a foster baby who
was in my care for nine months and who's
gone to live with her extended family.
And from this heartbreak I write, "And
the grief from each of these events
reverberates off each other, generating
an even deeper pain, but also creating
constellations."
The slowly unfolding tragedy of the news
that our baby was leaving came just
around the time of the 2021 explosion of
Israeli violence against Shik Sharah in
Palestine, which killed 226 people in
Palestine and 13 people in Israel.
After being confined to staying at home
for over a year to do to shelter in
place legal orders from to prevent the
spread of CO 19, I watched with rage and
grief as Palestinians and Shik Sharah
were being evicted from their homes by
Israeli settlers being denied the
simplest human need, shelter.
When they protested their evictions,
they were bombed
by the Israeli Defense Forces. Like the
author of the epigraph, when I look at
my foster baby, I would think of the
children of Palestine.
I'd been providing a home for this dear
child, but in Palestine, children were
having their homes stolen. I'd been
protecting my foster daughter's life
while children in Palestine had their
lives taken by the Israeli Defense
Forces. It is clear that some children's
lives matter to governments around the
world, but the lives of Palestinian
children do not.
Oh, time running away.
So to think through this dehumanization
I look to scholar Solar Meni and their
book the terraasene
assistant professor of ethnic studies at
UC Berkeley and art historian. Mmeni
states uh the terrorist falls outside
the category of the human and is an
entangled fusion of the non-human such
as infectious disease or toxic
landscapes and the less than human such
as racialized bioteterrorists.
And we see this conflation over and over
again conflating all Palestinians with
Hamas, all Palestinians with terrorists
such that Spanish um the uh acting
foreign minister of Spain in 2023 said
in an interview, "We cannot confuse
Hamas, which is in the EU list of
terrorist groups, with the entire
Palestinian population, imploring people
to stop repeating this racist
generalization."
So Mmani makes clear the ways that
terrorists are defined by the war on
terror and discourses of the
anthroposine as other than human and how
the terrorist is also used to delim del
limit the boundaries of the human. This
analysis extends the thinking of Edward
say and orientalism in which western
governments made clear through many many
documents and publications that anyone
in the orient including anyone in the
countries referred to as the Middle East
was considered to be a lesser form of
life than anyone in the accident.
Meni makes the link from orientalist
rhetoric to the war on terror to
articulate the racialized politics
underlying the idea of the anthroposine
our current epic which has been
described by scientists as defined by
human impacts on the world on a scale on
the scale of a geological age. One
aspect of these changes made to the
planet by humans is that of a warmer
climate and a more striated environment
which leads to the transmission of more
novel diseases such as CO 19.
So this book of mine takes a systemic
global approach to respond to the
challenges facing us to facing humanity
and responding in particular to black
Caribbean philosopher Sylvia Winter. I
ask if humanity is coming to an end if
it has already ended or if it ever was.
Looking at contemporary art and global
exhibitions, I ask what is the role for
art and humanities in a time in which
many have asked if we are seeing the
horizon of humanity? quote,
"The urgency of climate change is
described by winter as a species
threatening event." She calls on readers
to see the many struggles for racial,
gender, economic, and climate justice as
wrapped up in this single issue, saying,
quote, "All our present struggles with
relates to with respect to race, class,
gender, sexual orientation, ethnicity,
struggles of the over the environment,
global warming, severe climate change,
and the sharply unequal distribution of
the Earth's resources. These are all
differing facets of the central
ethnogass man versus human struggle.
In her article, Unsettling the
coloniality of being power, truth,
freedom towards the human after man, its
over representation and argument. Wow,
that's a long title. It's like dashes
and colons. There's a lot in there. She
differentiates quote man which over
represents itself as if it were the
human itself and the human species
itself otherwise. Later expanding on
this fact of the limits of the
definition of the human by European
philosophers she cites Jacqu Derida's
talk the ends of man in which he applies
his deconstructive method to the
language of man. Winter distinguishes
between the reference we of man as used
by French philosophers and the human
species itself.
She calls on readers to see the many
struggles for racial, gender, and
economic justice as wrapped up in this
single issue. She says, quote, the
reference we of man and of its ends, he
implies, dered implies, is not the
reference we of the human species
itself.
Yet, as he says, French philosophers
have assumed that as middle-class
philosophers, their reference we that of
man too, she refers to it as man too, is
isomorphic with the reference we in the
horizon of humanity. I am saying this is
still her quote. I'm saying that the
above is the single is the single issue
with which the global warming and
climate instability now confront us and
that we have to replace the ends of the
referent we of liberal monohumanist
demand too with the ecumenically human
ends of the referent we in the horizon
of humanity. We have no choice.
There's a lot there. She differentiates
between the people signified by the word
man in a sense shaped by religion and
western enlightenment philosophy
and the actual extent of human beings
calling to our attention the ways that
many groups of people have been
dehumanized. Black people, trans people,
poor people, indigenous people, disabled
people, so many.
Instead, she calls on thinkers and
activists to refigure the word human as
an action, a verb, not a noun. Saying
with being human, everything is
practice. With this focus on action,
human is something we do, not something
we are. In considering how we make this
huge shift towards saving all of
humanity instead of only the privileged
few from climate catastrophe, Winter
points to the codes that define us.
Learning from France Fenan's concept of
sociogenesis she describes our hybrid
quote our hybrid sociogenic codes and
their second set of instructions
here an algorithmic analysis as I
proposed in poetic operations is useful
in seeing that if the concept of the
human is shaped by codes with are both
which are both social and biological
those codes are algorithms which can be
analyzed and changed.
Winter herself states that these are
codes that are even able to override
where necessary the first set of
instructions of our own DNA.
So in this book I look to um artists and
theorists who offer strategies to
override these codes to think something
other than the human. I proposed this
idea of the alterum looking at artists
such as um Rahab Nazal. is a Palestinian
artist. Um, and she made this film
called Canada Park um, in which a
Palestinian village containing so many
things, churches, schools, mosques,
cemeteries, coffee houses, homes, um,
was was taken over, was ethnically
cleansed and turned into a park using
ecological regulations to say no one's
allowed to live there.
even though many of the residents are
still alive, not allowed to live there.
Um, funded specifically by uh Canadians
through the Jewish National Fund.
Um, her work, We the Wild Plants and
Fruit Trees, looks at the ways that uh
plants fight back and respond to
colonization and uh genocide and ethnic
cleansing. Um, okay, I want to skip
forward because I have little time. Um,
Wangachimu is another main inspiration
in this book, looking at all of her
alter human figures and all of the ways
she thinks of bodies other than
humanity. Um, but a work that we're
going to look at tomorrow in my
workshop.
Um,
and yes, I'm using Google Slides. I'm
still in the process of trying to divest
from all of these corporations that are
powering genocide. Google, Amazon,
Microsoft, also trying to divest from
Apple after watching those horrifying
videos of Tim Cook uh having dinner with
Trump and saying how great he is over
and over and over again. Aside from
giving a million dollars to the
inauguration, I'm dying to get rid of my
my five million Apple devices. Um anyway
um in this artwork oceanic quering the
ocean made with Cynthia Ling Lee, Gerald
Cassell, Suan Susana Ruiz, Huey Trong
and Ion Ian Costello. Um we think about
the environment as collaborator. We made
this in
really 2023. I thought it was 2022.
Okay, let's say it was 2023. Um and just
dealing with um grief and loss from
COVID from losing people from losing
people in our lives. my own loss of
losing my foster daughter and also
thinking about losing capacities. And
the main thing that shaped this work was
really a kind of accessibility
uh aesthetics and thinking about what
would work with all of our various
disabilities together to to make a short
film, a dance film, a movement film. Um
responding to texts by Gloria Anzaldua
about this specific beach in um in Santa
Cruz. Um, here's a facade installation
of that at the Leslie Lumen Museum in
New York. Um, there's also an augmented
reality version, unfortunately, on the
Apple App Store. Um, that I think is
still there that you could still
download from the Apple App Store where
you can see, um, our dance work and the
the poetry that we wrote. Um, the last
work that I want to show emerged out of
my writing in my science fiction novel,
Adams Never Touch, published by AK
Press, in 2023.
Um,
and you know, I didn't mean for this to
be a prophetic work. I meant for it to
be a reflective work, reflecting on
Trump's uh, presidency and inauguration.
Um, but it is about characters living
through the inauguration of a president
much like Trump who is both a racist and
a rapist and um dealing with their own
horrible horrible effects of that
presidency and thinking how do we get
out of this horrible uh timeline that
we're in and so they make a machine to
travel to other realities and other
timelines thinking about the many worlds
interpretation of quantum physics. Um,
so after writing that book, I thought,
you know, I want to make that machine.
Um, and started collaborating in my
studio, the critical reality studio,
with artists like uh Star Hagen Escera,
a two spirit dragon performance and
concepts artist. And um, thinking about
what alternate possible futures there
are, we looked at um, climate tipping
points. And so this is a response to
Lenton at all's study that says that if
we passed 1.5 degrees Celsius of warming
that we could tip multiple global
tipping points and that those tipping
points could pass each other. That study
came out in 2022. We've since passed
1.5. So we're in the unknown territory.
It could any of these could be tipped at
any time. But some of the tipping points
that we engaged with, oh this is this is
our 3D print of the machine, the
handheld particle accelerator that takes
you to other realities.
Um, some of the tipping points include
the perafrost. The whole northern half
of Canada and Russia is ice. The ground
is ice. And if it thaws, it could
release more carbon than humans have
already released. Um, passing 1.5 means
we're very close to it thawing. It's
already dripping and falling off. Um,
and this is an imaginary last piece of
Antarctic ice. And I'm out of time. This
is the AR version of that. I just want
to end with this short poem. Can I do
that? Thank you. Um, this is the
Atlantic Meridian overturning
circulation tipping point. We made a
15-oot sculpture of it for New Blanch.
And at New Blanch, they would not let me
read this poem. They wouldn't let it be
included in the work. So, I like to
include it when I can.
We will be the tipping point. We will be
the tipping point from a world where
only a few matter, only a few are cared
for. From a world where children in Gaza
are bombed in schools and hospitals.
Ocean will show us the way. A global
current made up of local eddies
whirling, dancing, self-organizing, is
being pushed down by melting Arctic ice
is overturning.
And we will, we must overturn as well to
a world where those who are in the most
need will receive the most care because
we take care of us. And in solidarity,
we care for others. To a world where
every child has a quiet, soft place to
grow and learn and love. We will be the
tipping point we must overturn.
Thank you.